---
layout: kz-page
subheadline:
title: Polyethylene terephthalate (PET), 30-45 million tonnes
meta_description: 
show_meta: true
header: no
author: karina
first_date: 11 June 2021
factchecked: "no"
image:
    title: pet.jpg
categories:
    - explore

---

Polyethylene terephthalate (PET) is a thermoplastic from the polyester family, i.e. its monomers contain the ester functional group.
The chemical formula for PET is (C<sub>10</sub>H<sub>8</sub>O<sub>4</sub>)n.
PET was patented in 1941.

### Production (in theory)

The monomer is either ester or monoester of ethylene glycol, **Bis(2-Hydroxyethyl) terephthalate** or **2-Hydroxyethyl terephthalic acid** respectively, and purified terephthalic acid.


Crude oil is refined into naphtha, which through catalytic reforming is turned into xylenes, from which **p-xylene** is separated. 
Natural gas through steam reforming is turned into syngas, which is transformed into **methanol**, which is transformed into **acetic acid**.
Ethylene is made by cracking naphtha or natural gas, it is then transformed into **ethylene glycol**.


P-xylene and acetic acid are transformed into **terephthalic acid**.
Ethylene glycol and terephthalic acid are transformed into Bis(2-Hydroxyethyl) terephthalate via esterification reaction (direct esterification, also known as a condensation reaction), with water as a byproduct.


There is another way to synthesize Bis(2-Hydroxyethyl) terephthalate.
P-xylene and methanol are transformed into **dimethyl terephthalate (DMT)**.
Ethylene glycol and DMT are transformed into Bis(2-Hydroxyethyl) terephthalate via transesterification reaction (ester interchange), with methanol as a byproduct.


Polymerization is achieved through a polycondensation reaction of the monomers, with water as a byproduct.
Bis(2-Hydroxyethyl) terephthalate through melt polymerisation is transformed into amorphous PET.
Amorphous PET can be transformed into bottle grade PET through solid state polymerisation, and then transformed into PET bottles through stretch blow moulding.
Amorphous PET can be transformed into PET film through film extrusion.



### Additives

The content of additives is less than 1% in PET bottles.


### Production (in practice)

About 30-45 million tonnes of PET are produced every year.
The majority of PET production capacity and consumption is located in Asia.
The [top 5 producers][3] account for more than 30% of the total production of PET globally.
These include Indorama Ventures, M.G. Chemicals, Zhejiang Yisheng Petrochemical (PetroChina Group), Sang Fang Xiang and DAK America.


More than 50% of PET consumption is in China.
In North America and Western Europe PET consumption stopped increasing rapidly since 2015, mainly due to increasing imports of polyester products from other regions. 



### Properties

PET is clear and tough; it can be semi-rigid or rigid.
Its density is about 1.4 g/cm<sup>3</sup>.
PET softens at 80&#8451;, its melting point is above 250&#8451;, it starts to decompose at 350&#8451; (boiling point).



### Modifications

Polyethylene terephthalate glycol-modified (PET-G) is a type of PET that is more resistant to heat, impact and solvents.
[It is made][4] by replacing the ethylene glycol in the molecular chain with a larger monomer, cyclohexane dimethanol.



### Usage

Synthetic fibre (polyester, polycotton and fleece) 60%, drinks bottles 30%, food containers, ovenable and microwavable food trays, carpets, films, etc.
More than half of the world’s synthetic fiber and plastic bottle demand is fulfilled by PET.
[This visualisation][1] by Visual Capitalist shows how the amount of plastic bottle waste generated daily compares to the size of the Eiffel Tower.


Reusable PET bottles are typically washed with a strong caustic soda solution (sodium hydroxide, NaOH) and sterilized before being refilled. 
The main disadvantage of PET bottles is that they are not completely gas tight.
This can be fixed by applying a silicon oxide (SiO<sub>x</sub>) barrier coating, but this coating is not resistant to caustic soda.
IKV and KHS Corpoplast GmbH have developed the [PECVD gas barrier coating][2] that is resistant to caustic soda, and allows PET bottles to be reused up to 20 times.





### Biobased PET

Biobased PET, for example synthesized from sugarcane, is identical to oil-based one and can be recycled in the same stream.




### Effect on climate

PET doesn't biodegrade, but if it was biodegradable it would release ethylene, a powerful greenhouse gas.


### Recycling


PET is the most widely recycled plastic. 
Different recycling methods are available for PET: mechanical recycling, solvent-based recycling, depolymerization, feedstock recycling (including biological decomposition).
Clear PET waste has high recycling value.
PET bottles can be recycled into textiles, but textiles made from PET can not be recycled into bottles.


[1]: https://www.visualcapitalist.com/visualizing-the-scale-of-plastic-bottle-waste-against-major-landmarks/
[2]: https://www.plasticstoday.com/packaging/technology-extending-lifecycle-reusable-pet-bottles-prestigious-german-award
[3]: https://www.plasticsinsight.com/resin-intelligence/resin-prices/polyethylene-terephthalate/
[4]: https://www.twi-global.com/technical-knowledge/faqs/what-is-petg#HowisitMade
